
=== p11 ===
Chapter 1. Introduction
AMD CDNA processors implement a parallel micro-architecture that is designed to provide an excellent
platform for general-purpose data parallel applications. Data-intensive applications that require high
bandwidth or are computationally intensive are a candidate for running on an AMD CDNA processor.
The figure below shows a block diagram of the AMD CDNA Generation series processors
Figure 1. AMD CDNA Generation Series Block Diagram
The CDNA device includes a data-parallel processor (DPP) array, a command processor, a memory controller,
and other logic (not shown). The CDNA command processor reads commands that the host has written to
memory-mapped CDNA registers in the system-memory address space. The command processor sends
hardware-generated interrupts to the host when the command is completed. The CDNA memory controller has
direct access to all CDNA device memory and the host-specified areas of system memory. To satisfy read and
write requests, the memory controller performs the functions of a direct-memory access (DMA) controller,
including computing memory-address offsets based on the format of the requested data in memory. In the
CDNA environment, a complete application includes two parts:
• a program running on the host processor, and
• programs, called kernels, running on the CDNA processor.
The CDNA programs are controlled by host commands that
• set CDNA internal base-address and other configuration registers,
• specify the data domain on which the CDNA Accelerator is to operate,
• invalidate and flush caches on the CDNA Accelerator, and
• cause the CDNA Accelerator to begin execution of a program.
The CDNA driver program runs on the host.
CDNA4 Instruction Set Architecture
3 of 600

=== p12 ===
The DPP array is the heart of the CDNA processor. The array is organized as a set of compute unit pipelines,
each independent from the others, that are designed to operate in parallel on streams of floating-point or
integer data. The compute unit pipelines can process data or, through the memory controller, transfer data to,
or from, memory. Computation in a compute unit pipeline can be made conditional. Outputs written to
memory can also be made conditional.
When it receives a request, the compute unit pipeline loads instructions and data from memory, begins
execution, and continues until the end of the kernel. As kernels are running, the CDNA hardware automatically
fetches instructions from memory into on-chip caches; CDNA software plays no role in this. CDNA kernels can
load data from off-chip memory into on-chip general-purpose registers (GPRs) and caches.
The AMD CDNA devices can detect floating point exceptions and can generate interrupts. In particular, they
can detect IEEE floating-point exceptions in hardware; these can be recorded for post-execution analysis. The
software interrupts shown in the previous figure from the command processor to the host represent hardware-
generated interrupts for signaling command-completion and related management functions.
The CDNA processor is designed to hide memory latency by keeping track of potentially hundreds of work-
items in different stages of execution, and by overlapping compute operations with memory-access operations.
1.1. Terminology
Table 1. Basic Terms
Term
Description
CDNA Processor
The shader processor is a scalar and vector ALU capable of running complex programs on behalf of a
wavefront.
Dispatch
A dispatch launches a 1D, 2D, or 3D grid of work to the CDNA processor array.
Workgroup
A workgroup is a collection of wavefronts that have the ability to synchronize with each other quickly;
they also can share data through the Local Data Share.
Wavefront
A collection of 64 work-items that execute in parallel on a single CDNA processor.
Work-item
A single element of work: one element from the dispatch grid, or in graphics a pixel or vertex.
Literal Constant
A 32-bit integer or float constant that is placed in the instruction stream.
Scalar ALU (SALU) The scalar ALU operates on one value per wavefront and manages all control flow.
Vector ALU (VALU) The vector ALU maintains Vector GPRs that are unique for each work item and execute arithmetic
operations uniquely on each work-item.
Microcode format
The microcode format describes the bit patterns used to encode instructions. Each instruction is
either 32 or 64 bits.
Instruction
An instruction is the basic unit of the kernel. Instructions include: vector ALU, scalar ALU, memory
transfer, and control flow operations.
Buffer Resource
(V#)
A buffer resource descriptor describes a buffer in memory: address, data format, stride, etc.
CDNA4 Instruction Set Architecture
1.1. Terminology
4 of 600
