
=== p13 ===
Chapter 2. Program Organization
CDNA kernels are programs executed by the CDNA processor. Conceptually, the kernel is executed
independently on every work-item, but in reality the CDNA processor groups 64 work-items into a wavefront,
which executes the kernel on all 64 work-items in one pass.
The CDNA processor consists of:
• A scalar ALU, which operates on one value per wavefront (common to all work items).
• A vector ALU, which operates on unique values per work-item.
• Local data storage, which allows work-items within a workgroup to communicate and share data.
• Scalar memory, which can transfer data between SGPRs and memory through a cache.
• Vector memory, which can transfer data between VGPRs and memory
All kernel control flow is handled using scalar ALU instructions. This includes if/else, branches and looping.
Scalar ALU (SALU) and memory instructions work on an entire wavefront and operate on up to two SGPRs, as
well as literal constants.
Vector memory and ALU instructions operate on all work-items in the wavefront at one time. In order to
support branching and conditional execute, every wavefront has an EXECute mask that determines which
work-items are active at that moment, and which are dormant. Active work-items execute the vector
instruction, and dormant ones treat the instruction as a NOP. The EXEC mask can be changed at any time by
Scalar ALU instructions.
Vector ALU instructions can take up to three arguments, which can come from VGPRs, SGPRs, or literal
constants that are part of the instruction stream. They operate on all work-items enabled by the EXEC mask.
Vector compare and add with- carryout return a bit-per-work-item mask back to the SGPRs to indicate, per
work-item, which had a "true" result from the compare or generated a carry-out.
Vector memory instructions transfer data between VGPRs and memory. Each work-item supplies its own
memory address and supplies or receives unique data. These instructions are also subject to the EXEC mask.
2.1. Compute Shaders
Compute kernels (shaders) are generic programs that can run on the CDNA processor, taking data from
memory, processing it, and writing results back to memory. Compute kernels are created by a dispatch, which
causes the CDNA processors to run the kernel over all of the work-items in a 1D, 2D, or 3D grid of data. The
CDNA processor walks through this grid and generates wavefronts, which then run the compute kernel. Each
work-item is initialized with its unique address (index) within the grid. Based on this index, the work-item
computes the address of the data it is required to work on and what to do with the results.
2.2. Data Sharing
The AMD CDNA stream processors can share data between different work-items. Data sharing can significantly
boost performance. The figure below shows the memory hierarchy that is available to each work-item.
CDNA4 Instruction Set Architecture
2.1. Compute Shaders
5 of 600

=== p14 ===
Figure 2. Shared Memory Hierarchy
2.2.1. Local Data Share (LDS)
Each compute unit has a 160 kB memory space that enables low-latency communication between work-items
within a work-group, or the work-items within a wavefront; this is the local data share (LDS). This memory is
configured with 64 banks, each with 640 entries of 4 bytes. The shared memory contains 32 integer atomic
units designed to enable fast, unordered atomic operations. This memory can be used as a software cache for
predictable re-use of data, a data exchange machine for the work-items of a work-group, or as a cooperative
way to enable efficient access to off-chip memory.
2.3. Device Memory
The AMD CDNA devices offer several methods for access to off-chip memory from the processing elements
(PE) within each compute unit. On the primary read path, the device consists of multiple channels of L2 read-
write cache that provides data to an L1 cache for each compute unit. Specific cache-less load instructions can
force data to be retrieved from device memory during an execution of a load clause. Load requests that overlap
within the clause are cached with respect to each other. The output cache is formed by two levels of cache: the
first for write-combining cache (collect scatter and store operations and combine them to provide good access
patterns to memory); the second is a read/write cache with atomic units that lets each processing element
complete unordered atomic accesses that return the initial value. Each processing element provides the
destination address on which the atomic operation acts, the data to be used in the atomic operation, and a
return address for the read/write atomic unit to store the pre-op value in memory. Each store or atomic
operation can be set up to return an acknowledgment to the requesting PE upon write confirmation of the
return value (pre-atomic op value at destination) being stored to device memory.
This acknowledgment has two purposes:
CDNA4 Instruction Set Architecture
2.3. Device Memory
6 of 600

=== p15 ===
• enabling a PE to recover the pre-op value from an atomic operation by performing a cache-less load from
its return address after receipt of the write confirmation acknowledgment, and
• enabling the system to maintain a relaxed consistency model.
Each scatter write from a given PE to a given memory channel maintains order. The acknowledgment enables
one processing element to implement a fence to maintain serial consistency by ensuring all writes have been
posted to memory prior to completing a subsequent write. In this manner, the system can maintain a relaxed
consistency model between all parallel work-items operating on the system.
CDNA4 Instruction Set Architecture
2.3. Device Memory
7 of 600
